
DESIGN & INTERFACE STANDARDS

Interface, Experience & Accessibility

Companion to the Autonomous AI Agent Implementation Plan v2

Document Owner
[Name / Team]
Version
1.1
Status
Draft — for review
Date
August 29, 2026
Distribution
Design, Engineering, Product, Legal

Section 2 states a legal requirement already in force. Section 11 is enforced in CI, not by review alone.


1. Purpose and Scope
This document defines the interface and experience standards for the autonomous agent platform. It is the third companion to the Implementation Plan, alongside the Engineering Standards.
It covers two things that are usually treated separately and should not be. The first is the visual system — spacing, type, colour, corners, responsive behaviour — the craft layer that makes an interface feel considered rather than assembled. The second is agent-specific interaction design: how an autonomous system communicates what it is doing, how confident it is, and how a person stops it. For this product the second is the harder problem, and it is where most of the design risk sits.
One design thesis governs everything below: the interface is the accountability layer between user intent and autonomous action, not a presentation surface applied after the model works. Every standard here follows from that.
2. The Hard Constraint: Article 50 Disclosure
Most of this document is craft judgement. This section is not — it is a legal requirement with a UI-shaped solution and it is already in force.
Providers must design systems that interact directly with natural persons — chatbots, AI agents, avatars — so that people are informed they are interacting with AI. The obligations became enforceable on 2 August 2026, with a transitional period to 2 December 2026 for marking obligations on systems already placed on the market.

What does not satisfy the requirement
A disclosure buried in terms and conditions, a machine-readable watermark on its own, or a vague reference to an "assistant" does not discharge the Article 50(1) duty — the information must be perceivable in the interaction itself. Deployers cannot rely on marking embedded by the provider to satisfy their own disclosure obligation.  Non-compliance carries fines up to €15 million or 3% of total worldwide annual turnover. 

Design consequences, stated as requirements:
	•	AI involvement is disclosed in the interaction surface at first contact, in the same visual weight as other primary interface text. Not a tooltip, not a footer, not a settings page.
	•	Agent-generated content carries a persistent visible marker that survives scrolling, collapsing, and copy-to-clipboard where technically feasible.
	•	The disclosure is assessed against the actual audience, with a lower comprehension threshold where children, elderly users, or persons with disabilities form part of it. Plain language, not legal register.
	•	Disclosure copy is a design-reviewed artefact owned jointly by Design and Legal, versioned in the prompt/config registry alongside other production configuration.
3. Design Principles
Four principles, ordered by how often they will settle an argument.

Principle
Meaning
Failure it prevents
Legibility
The agent's plan, current step, and tool use are visible without the user asking.
A chat surface that hides reasoning erodes trust the moment a mistake happens and leaves users unable to intervene.
Calibrated trust
Confidence is surfaced selectively — when it is low, or when stakes are high.
Automation bias: users accepting low-confidence output, or anxiously re-checking reliable output.
Control plane
Autonomy is a spectrum with visible, changeable settings — not an on/off switch.
Users refusing to grant the agent any authority because the only option is total authority.
Recoverability
Every agent output carries a visible way to edit, reject, or flag it.
Silent acceptance of wrong output; no correction signal ever reaching the eval loop.

On disclaimers. The reflex when asked to surface AI transparency is to add "This is an AI-generated suggestion". That is legal hedging dressed as design, not transparency. The correction affordance is the real trust signal — users who know they can correct a system are measurably more willing to engage with it. Article 50 sets a floor for disclosure; it does not substitute for designing the control surface.
4. Token Architecture
Two layers, always. Primitives hold raw values; semantic tokens express intent and are the only thing components reference. A component that hard-codes a hex value or a pixel gap is a defect, because it makes theming a component-by-component rewrite instead of a token-level change.

/* Layer 1 — primitives. Never referenced by components. */
--gray-50 … --gray-900        /* OKLCH for perceptual evenness */
--space-1: 0.25rem … --space-16: 4rem
--radius-sm: 0.25rem  --radius-md: 0.5rem
--radius-lg: 1rem     --radius-full: 9999px

/* Layer 2 — semantic. The only layer components use. */
--surface-canvas        --surface-raised      --surface-sunken
--text-primary          --text-secondary      --text-muted
--border-subtle         --border-strong       --focus-ring

/* Agent-state semantics — specific to this product */
--agent-thinking        --agent-acting        --agent-awaiting-approval
--agent-confidence-low  --agent-error         --agent-disclosure

The agent-state tokens are the non-obvious part. Agent status is not a decorative concern — it is the primary information channel in this product, so it gets first-class token treatment rather than ad-hoc colours chosen per component. --radius-full: 9999px is the idiomatic pill token because it holds regardless of element height.
5. Spacing and Whitespace
Base unit is 4px with an 8px rhythm. 8 is highly divisible, avoids fractional pixels across device pixel ratios, and is the shared foundation of both Apple's and Google's guidelines. Half-steps of 4px exist for fine adjustment; anything not on the 4px grid requires justification in review.

The rule that does most of the work: internal ≤ external
Space around a group should equal or exceed the space within it.  When padding inside a card exceeds the gap between cards, the grouping reads backwards and the eye cannot tell where one unit ends and the next begins. Most "cluttered" interfaces are not short of whitespace — they have it distributed in the wrong ratio.

On "pristine". Whitespace is not emptiness to be filled or minimised — it is the mechanism that encodes grouping, hierarchy, and pace. Three disciplines follow:
	•	Whitespace is proportional, not uniform. A section break earns more space than a paragraph break; a paragraph break earns more than a line. Uniform spacing reads as flat and makes scanning slower, not calmer.
	•	Density is contextual. An operator console reviewing agent runs is a dense, information-first surface. A first-run approval dialogue is not. Do not apply one density to both — apply one  to both.
	•	Cut before you add. The last pass on any screen removes one element. If nothing can be removed, the screen has not been designed yet.

Measure. Body copy sits at 60–75 characters. Beyond that the return sweep loses the line; below it the rhythm fragments. This constrains container width more than any breakpoint does.
6. Typography
Fluid by default. Fixed sizes at discrete breakpoints produce jarring jumps as the viewport changes; clamp() scales smoothly between a floor and a ceiling.

/* Bounds in rem, scaling term in vw — this ordering is an
   accessibility requirement, not a style preference. */
--step--1: clamp(0.833rem, 0.79rem + 0.22vw, 0.95rem);
--step-0:  clamp(1rem,     0.95rem + 0.25vw, 1.125rem);
--step-1:  clamp(1.2rem,   1.13rem + 0.36vw, 1.4rem);
--step-2:  clamp(1.44rem,  1.34rem + 0.52vw, 1.75rem);
--step-3:  clamp(1.73rem,  1.58rem + 0.75vw, 2.19rem);

Why the bounds must be in rem. Viewport units do not scale when a user zooms text, so a clamp expressed entirely in vw silently defeats browser zoom and assistive technology. Bounds in rem, scaling term in vw. This is the single most commonly botched detail in fluid type systems.

Role
Rule
Families
Two, plus a mono for tokens, IDs, code, and cost figures. A third display face requires justification.
Mono usage
Anything a user may copy, compare character-by-character, or quote in a support ticket: request IDs, tenant IDs, model names, token counts.
Line height
1.5 for body, 1.2–1.3 for headings, 1.4 for dense tabular data.
Weights
Three maximum. Hierarchy comes from size, space, and colour before it comes from weight.
Numerals
Tabular figures for all metrics, costs, and latency values so columns align and digits do not jitter during live updates.
Casing
Sentence case throughout, including buttons and headings. No all-caps except in small utility labels.
7. Corners, Edges, and Elevation
Nested radius formula: inner radius = outer radius − padding. Concentric corners that ignore this look subtly wrong in a way most people feel but cannot name — the inner shape appears to bulge against the outer one. Where the calculation goes negative, the inner element keeps its own smaller token rather than going square.
Radius tokens are named semantically (sm, md, lg, full), never by pixel value, so shape language can change in one place.

	•	Edges carry meaning. A border is a boundary between two things that could be confused. A shadow is elevation above the surface. Do not use both to express the same separation — pick the one that states the relationship.
	•	Elevation is a short scale. Four levels: flush, raised (cards), floating (dropdowns, popovers), overlay (modals). A fifth level means the hierarchy is unclear, not that more depth is needed.
	•	Hairlines respect density. Dividers in dense tables use the subtle border token; structural separation uses the strong one. A single divider weight everywhere produces either noise or invisibility.
8. Responsive and Cross-Device
Four tools, each for a distinct job — a breakpoint-first approach is describing 2015.

Tool
Job
Media queries
Page-level structure only: navigation shape, column count, sidebar presence.
Container queries
Component-level adaptation. Baseline widely available since August 2025.
clamp()
Fluid type and spacing between breakpoints, eliminating jumps.
Intrinsic grid
Layouts that need no breakpoints at all — auto-fit and minmax before a media query.

Breakpoints are found, not inherited. Choose them by widening the browser until the layout breaks rather than copying a device list; device widths change yearly, content breakpoints do not. 30rem, 48rem, 64rem and 90rem is a reasonable starting set. Three to five is sufficient.
Viewport height units. Use dvh for predictable behaviour as mobile browser chrome shows and hides; svh where content must never be clipped. A 100vh panel extends below the visible area on mobile — this matters here because the agent activity panel is exactly the kind of full-height surface that breaks.

Product-specific device thinking. This platform has two distinct surfaces with different device profiles, and they should not be forced into one layout:
	•	Operator console — wide desktop, dense, multi-panel, keyboard-driven. Use the horizontal canvas for a stage layout with contextual sidebars rather than centring content and leaving empty chrome.
	•	Approval and intervention surfaces — frequently mobile, often urgent, often the first thing a person sees after a notification. These must be complete and actionable on a small screen, since a human-in-the-loop gate that requires a laptop is a gate that will be rubber-stamped.
9. Accessibility Baseline
WCAG 2.2 Level AA is the floor, and it is now enforced rather than merely applicable. Building to 2.1 today is not the cheaper decision over any realistic horizon, since 2.2 is a superset and meeting it satisfies 2.1 automatically.

Criterion
Requirement
Where this product will fail it
2.5.8 Target Size
Interactive targets ≥ 24×24 CSS px.
Dense run-log rows, inline approve/reject controls, table row actions.
2.4.11 Focus Not Obscured
Focused element not hidden by author content.
Sticky headers and the persistent agent status bar covering focused rows.
2.4.13 Focus Appearance
Indicator ≥ a 2px perimeter of the component, ≥ 3:1 contrast.
Custom-styled controls where the default outline was removed and not replaced.
2.5.7 Dragging Movements
Non-drag alternative for any drag action.
Any reordering, threshold sliders, or drag-to-assign in the config UI.
3.3.8 Accessible Auth
No cognitive function test in auth.
Blocking password paste; puzzle-based verification.
3.2.6 Consistent Help
Help in a consistent, findable location.
Support entry point moving between console and approval surfaces.

Focus Not Obscured and Target Size are the most common failures on products that already passed 2.1. Both are usually cheap to fix and expensive to discover late.

Testing reality
Automated tooling catches roughly 30–40% of accessibility issues; the remainder require manual keyboard and screen-reader testing.  Budget the manual pass — a green Lighthouse score is a starting point, not evidence of conformance. Reduced motion, keyboard-only operation, and 200% zoom are part of the definition of done for every screen, not a hardening phase.
10. Agent Interaction Patterns
This is the section with the least prior art and the most product risk. Five patterns apply to essentially every enterprise agent interface: planning visibility, tool-use disclosure, memory surfacing, multi-step workflow tracking, and recovery routing.
10.1 State is the primary content
The agent's state model must be visible and named consistently in copy, colour, and motion. Silence during a long-running task is the single most trust-destroying state, and this platform's own architecture guarantees long-running tasks — agents take minutes, not milliseconds.

State
What the user must see
Queued
Position or expected start. Never an indeterminate spinner alone.
Thinking
That reasoning is underway, with the current objective in plain language.
Acting
Which tool, on what, with what scope. This is the tool-use disclosure requirement.
Awaiting approval
What will happen on approval, what happens on rejection, and any deadline.
Streaming
Partial output rendered progressively; time-to-first-token is the perceived latency.
Recovering
That a retry is in progress, which attempt, and whether cost is being re-incurred.
Failed
What failed, at which step, what was already committed, and the single next action.

The "already committed" detail matters more than it looks. Because the platform performs real side effects — webhooks delivered, tokens billed, records written — a failure message that does not say what already happened forces the user to go and check. That is the moment trust is lost, not the failure itself.
10.2 Confidence, shown selectively
Do not attach a confidence percentage to every output. Surface it when confidence is notably low, or when the stakes are high enough to matter. Universal confidence display trains users to ignore it, which is worse than not showing it.
Without any confidence signalling, users fall into automation bias — accepting low-confidence output uncritically — or the opposite failure of anxiously double-checking work that was reliable. Both destroy the productivity case for the agent.
Language carries this as much as visual treatment. "Based on available data, the recommended action is X" and "The action is X" are both honest; only one acknowledges fallibility.
10.3 Graduated autonomy
Autonomy is not binary. Provide visible levels — suggest only, act with approval, act and notify, act silently within defined limits — set per action class and per tenant, changeable without contacting support. This is also how the human-oversight expectations for higher-risk deployments are satisfied in the interface rather than in a policy document.
10.4 Correction and the transparency feed
Every agent output carries a visible mechanism to edit, reject, or flag it. Two consequences follow, and the second is the one teams miss:
	•	Corrections are product telemetry. A rejection is the highest-quality eval signal available, and it should flow directly into the golden dataset described in the Implementation Plan. The correction UI is the collection mechanism for Component 14.
	•	Past errors should be visible, not buried. A transparency feed that includes entries such as "Agent proposed X; operator approved Y instead" helps people build accurate expectations about where the system is and is not reliable.
11. Interface Vocabulary
Words are design material. In an agent product they carry more of the trust burden than in a conventional interface, because they are how the system explains itself while acting on someone's behalf.
Two registers are banned from the product surface: implementation language and marketing language. They fail for opposite reasons. Implementation language describes the system to itself — it asks the user to understand the architecture in order to operate the product. Marketing language describes the system to a buyer — it asks the user to be impressed rather than informed. Neither helps a person decide what to do next, which is the only job interface copy has.
11.1 Jargon is relative to audience, not absolute
A blanket ban on technical terms would break the operator console, where a platform engineer legitimately needs to see token counts, latency, and model names — those words are that audience's working vocabulary, and replacing them with softened equivalents would make the console worse. The rule is therefore scoped by surface.

Surface
Audience
Vocabulary rule
Operator console
Platform engineers running the system
Domain terms permitted where they are the precise word. Internal identifiers, class names, and stack traces still banned.
Tenant admin
Customer administrators configuring limits
Plain language with domain terms defined on first use. No internal architecture vocabulary.
Approval & intervention
Anyone, often on mobile, often urgent
Plain language only. No term that requires product knowledge to act on.
End-user surfaces
People the agent acts on behalf of
Plain language only. Assessed against the Article 50 audience test.

The test that settles disputes: can the reader take the correct action without knowing how the system is built? If understanding the sentence requires knowing that a queue exists, the sentence is written from the wrong side of the screen.
11.2 Implementation language: banned terms and replacements
These appear in user-facing strings whenever engineering vocabulary leaks through unedited. The left column is what the system calls it; the right is what the person calls it.

Do not write
Write instead
Webhook endpoint / payload
Where we send updates / the update
Token budget exceeded
You've reached your monthly usage limit
Vector store / embedding / index
Your documents / your knowledge base
Inference failed, 502 upstream
The assistant couldn't finish. Nothing was charged.
Idempotency key conflict
This request was already submitted
Dead-letter queue
Updates we couldn't deliver
Prompt version rolled back
Restored the previous settings
Rate limit / throttled / 429
Too many requests at once. Try again in a moment.
Guardrail rejected output
The assistant stopped — this request isn't allowed
Tenant / instance / namespace
Your organisation / your workspace
Async job enqueued
Started. We'll notify you when it's done.
Null / undefined / N/A
Not set / Nothing yet / Unknown
Auth token expired
Your session ended. Sign in to continue.
Sandbox execution timeout
The task ran too long and was stopped

Never surfaced under any circumstance: stack traces, exception class names, internal service names, database column names, model identifiers on end-user surfaces, request hashes shown without a copy affordance, and raw provider error strings. These are simultaneously a usability failure and an information-disclosure risk — an error that names the internal service tells an attacker how the system is built.
11.3 Marketing language: banned in-product
Promotional register belongs on the website, not inside a tool someone is using to get work done. It costs credibility precisely where credibility matters most, because a system that praises itself while acting autonomously reads as evasive.

Do not write
Why it fails
Write instead
Powerful AI-driven insights
Describes the seller's view, not the user's task
Name the actual output
Seamless / effortless / magical
Claims an experience the user will judge for themselves
Say what happens
Revolutionary / next-generation
Unverifiable and ages badly
Delete
Supercharge / unlock / unleash
Verb inflation; hides the actual action
Use the plain verb
Simply / just / easily
Blames the user when it isn't simple
Delete
Oops! Something went wrong
Cheerful vagueness at the worst moment
State what failed and the next step
Success! 🎉
Celebration in place of confirmation
Name what was completed
Our intelligent engine
Self-praise inside a working tool
The assistant / the agent
Trusted by thousands
Sales proof inside the product
Delete

The exclamation mark is a defect. Interface copy does not shout, apologise, or celebrate. It confirms, explains, and directs.
11.4 Where this intersects Article 50
The anti-jargon rule is also a compliance mechanism. The disclosure duty is assessed against a reasonably well-informed person drawn from the actual audience, with a lower threshold where children, elderly people, or persons with disabilities form part of it. A disclosure written in system vocabulary — referencing an "LLM-backed conversational interface" — is unlikely to satisfy that test even though it is technically accurate. Plain language is the compliant form.
Equally, a vague reference to an "assistant" is expressly insufficient on its own. The copy must be plain and unambiguous about AI involvement: neither jargon nor euphemism.
11.5 Baseline rules
	•	Name things by what the person controls, not by how the system is built. A person manages notifications, not webhook configuration; sets spending limits, not per-key token budgets.
	•	An action keeps its name through the whole flow. The button that says "Approve" produces a confirmation that says "Approved" — not "Submitted" or "Success".
	•	Errors state what happened, what it cost, and the next action. They do not apologise and are never vague: "The provider timed out after 30 seconds. Nothing was charged. Retry, or switch to the fallback model."
	•	Empty states are invitations, not decoration. An operator console with no runs yet shows how to start one.
	•	Sentence case, active voice, plain verbs, no filler. One job per element: a label labels, an example demonstrates, nothing does double duty.
	•	Numbers carry units and context. "1,204" means nothing; "1,204 of 5,000 monthly runs" does.
11.6 Enforcement
A vocabulary standard that lives only in a document will not survive contact with a deadline. Three mechanisms make it hold:
	•	All user-facing strings live in the localisation catalogue, never inline in components. This is enforced by lint and is the precondition for everything else — strings that cannot be enumerated cannot be reviewed.
	•	A banned-lexicon check runs in CI against the catalogue, scoped by surface, failing the build on terms from 11.2 and 11.3. The list is version-controlled and owned by Design, and additions do not require an engineering change.
	•	Error strings are reviewed as a set, not individually, because consistency across failure messages is what makes them learnable. A new error string requires a matching entry in the error catalogue with cause, cost implication, and next action.

The rule of thumb for reviewers
Read the string aloud to someone who does not work on this product and ask them what they would do next. If they ask a clarifying question about the system rather than about their own task, the copy has failed — regardless of how accurate it is.
12. Design Review Gates

Gate
Check
Blocking
Tokens
No hard-coded colour, spacing, radius, or shadow values in components
Yes
Grid
All spacing on the 4px grid; internal ≤ external verified
Yes
Type scale
clamp() bounds in rem; no vw-only sizing
Yes
Contrast
Text and focus indicators meet AA against every surface token
Yes
Targets
All interactive targets ≥ 24×24 CSS px
Yes
Keyboard
Full operation without a pointer; focus never obscured
Yes
Motion
prefers-reduced-motion respected
Yes
Article 50
AI disclosure perceivable in the interaction surface
Yes — Legal
Agent states
All seven states designed, including failure and recovery
Yes
Strings externalised
No user-facing copy inline in components
Yes
Vocabulary
Banned-lexicon check passes for the target surface
Yes
Error catalogue
Every new error has cause, cost, and next action
Yes
Manual a11y
Keyboard and screen-reader pass at 200% zoom
Reviewer
Restraint
One element removed on the final pass
Reviewer

The reviewer's questions. Automation covers the measurable items, so review attention belongs where judgement is required: What does this screen look like when the agent is wrong? Can the user stop it from here? What is already committed when this fails? And what did we remove?
